feat: add documentation for component queries (#2881)
evidence-dev/evidence: sites/docs/pages/components/custom-components/component-queries.md

# Component Queries

Component queries allow you to run SQL queries in your component code.

Component queries transform how we build data visualizations. Instead of passing data down through props from parent pages, components become self-contained units that can request exactly what they need. This independence makes components more reusable and easier to maintain, as all the logic for both fetching and displaying data lives in one place.

## Static Queries

> Let's start with static queries, which form the foundation of component-level data fetching. We call them "static" because their SQL text remains constant throughout the component's lifecycle. Think of them like prepared statements in traditional databases - they're defined once when your component is created, and are executed when `QueryLoad` is mounted (usually when your component is mounted).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Static queries are "static" because the SQL string they run cannot change throughout the component's lifecycle. They are defined once when your component is created, and are executed when `QueryLoad` is mounted.
```

```html title="components/TableList.svelte"
&lt;script>
    import { buildQuery } from '@evidence-dev/component-utilities/buildQuery';
    import { QueryLoad } from '@evidence-dev/core-components';

    const query = buildQuery(
        'SELECT * FROM information_schema.tables',
    );
</script>

<QueryLoad data={query} let:loaded={tables}>
    <svelte:fragment slot="skeleton" />
    
    <ul>
        {#each tables as table}
            <li>{table.table_name}</li>
        {/each}
    </ul>
</QueryLoad>
```

### The Query Loader

The `QueryLoad` component manages the entire lifecycle of your query execution. It handles:
- Executing your query against DuckDB
- Managing loading states
- Handling any errors that occur
- Delivering results to your component

```html
<QueryLoad data={query} let:loaded={tableData}>
    <svelte:fragment slot="skeleton" />
    <!-- Your component content here -->
</QueryLoad>
```

The `let:loaded` directive creates a new variable containing your query results. Using a descriptive name (like `tableData` or `salesMetrics`) makes your code more maintainable than the generic `loaded`.

## Dynamic Queries

> As your components become more sophisticated, you might need queries that change based on user input or component state. This is where dynamic queries come in. They extend the static query pattern to create interactive visualizations, filtered tables, or any component that needs to fetch different data based on user actions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For queries that change based on user input or component state, you need dynamic queries. This allows you to create interactive components.
```

Component queries transform how we build data visualizations. Instead of passing data down through props from parent pages, components become self-contained units that can request exactly what they need. This independence makes components more reusable and easier to maintain, as all the logic for both fetching and displaying data lives in one place.

## Static Queries

Let's start with static queries, which form the foundation of component-level data fetching. We call them "static" because their SQL text remains constant throughout the component's lifecycle. Think of them like prepared statements in traditional databases - they're defined once when your component is created and can be executed whenever fresh data is needed.

Here's how to create a component that fetches and displays information about tables in your database:

```html title="components/TableList.svelte"
&lt;script>
    import { buildQuery } from '@evidence-dev/component-utilities/buildQuery';
    import { QueryLoad } from '@evidence-dev/core-components';

    const query = buildQuery(
        'SELECT * FROM information_schema.tables',

>         'table-list-tables-query'  // Always required - must be unique

Author: ```suggestion
        'TableListTablesQuery'  // Always required - must be unique
```

---
sidebar_position: 100
title: Component Queries
---

Custom components in Evidence can include their own queries, allowing you to fetch data directly within the component rather than passing it as props. This gives you more flexibility in how you structure your components and can make them more self-contained.

## Basic Query Implementation

To add a query to your component, you'll need two key imports from Evidence's utilities:

```javascript
import { buildQuery } from '@evidence-dev/component-utilities/buildQuery';
import { QueryLoad, Skeleton } from '@evidence-dev/core-components';
```

Here's a simple example of how to use these imports:

```html title="components/TableList.svelte"
&lt;script>
    // Build a static query
    const query = buildQuery(
        'SELECT * FROM information_schema.tables',

>         'table-list-query' // Optional unique identifier

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        'table-list-query' // unique identifier for the query
```

we can just say this is mandatory? no benefit to not using

    );
</script>

<QueryLoad data={query} let:loaded={tables}>
    <ul>
        {#each tables as table}
            <li>{table.table_name}</li>
        {/each}
    </ul>
</QueryLoad>
```

Let's break down what's happening:

1. First, we use `buildQuery` to create our query. It takes two parameters:
   - The SQL query text
   - An optional unique identifier for the query

2. We then use the `QueryLoad` component to handle the query execution and loading states. The `let:loaded` syntax gives us access to our query results once they're ready.

> <Alert status="info">

Reviewer: shall we just delete this completely, and document as though this is mandatory

feels like unneccessary info

**About Query IDs**

While query IDs are optional, they can be helpful for debugging and performance optimization. If you're using multiple queries in your component, it's recommended to give each a unique identifier.

</Alert>

## Working with Loading States

> The `QueryLoad` component automatically handles loading states for your queries. You have three main approaches for managing how loading states appear:

Reviewer: not super clear why you would pick between these at the moment.

The recommended option is also the most complex because you have to specify the dimensions of the slot. 

Why is the "Default" state not the recommended option

### 1. Custom Loading State (Recommended)
```html
<QueryLoad data={query} let:loaded={tables}>
    <div slot="skeleton" class="h-96 w-72">
        <Skeleton />
    </div>
    <!-- Your component content -->
</QueryLoad>
```

### 2. Hide Loading State
```html
<QueryLoad data={query} let:loaded={tables}>
    <svelte:fragment slot="skeleton" />
    <!-- Your component content -->
</QueryLoad>
```

### 3. Default Loading State
```html
<QueryLoad data={query} let:loaded={tables}>
    <!-- Your component content -->
</QueryLoad>
```

## Working with Query Results

> There are several ways to access your query results within the `QueryLoad` component. Here are the different patterns and when to use them:

Reviewer: Can we just recommend the named variable approach here and remove the other options

It's not that verbose, and the other options seems less flexible

### Named Variable (Recommended)
```html
<QueryLoad data={query} let:loaded={tables}>
    {#each tables as table}
        <li>{table.table_name}</li>
    {/each}
</QueryLoad>
```
This approach is most clear and helps prevent naming conflicts. Use this when you want to give your query results a descriptive name.

### Default Variable
```html
<QueryLoad data={query} let:loaded>
    {#each loaded as table}
        <li>{table.table_name}</li>
    {/each}
</QueryLoad>
```
This pattern works well for simple components with only one query. However, it can become confusing in components with multiple queries.

### Query Named Variable
```html
<QueryLoad data={query} let:loaded={query}>
    {#each query as table}
        <li>{table.table_name}</li>
    {/each}
</QueryLoad>
```
While this works, it's not recommended as it can lead to confusion between the query definition and its results.

<Alert status="info">

**Best Practices**

- Use descriptive names for your query results that reflect the data they contain
- Avoid naming conflicts by not reusing variable names
- Consider using custom loading states for better user experience

> - Include query IDs when debugging or working with multiple queries

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Include unique query IDs
```

    
    // This will hold our query result
    let query;

    // Create a query function that will update whenever we need new data
    const queryFunction = Query.createReactive({
        execFn: getQueryFunction(),
        callback: v => query = v
    });

    let limit = 10;
    let schemaName = 'public';
    
    $: queryFunction(`
        SELECT * 
        FROM information_schema.tables 
        WHERE table_schema = '${schemaName}'
        LIMIT ${limit}
    `);
</script>

<div>
    <input type="number" bind:value={limit} min={0} />
    <input type="text" bind:value={schemaName} />
</div>
```

Now our query will update whenever either `limit` or `schemaName` changes.

### Advanced Configuration

The `Query.createReactive()` function accepts additional configuration options for more complex use cases. Here are some commonly used options:

```javascript
const queryFunction = Query.createReactive({
    execFn: getQueryFunction(),
    callback: v => query = v,
    // Additional options:
    timeout: 5000,          // Query timeout in milliseconds
    maxRetries: 3,          // Number of retries on failure
    retryDelay: 1000,       // Delay between retries

>     // See Evidence documentation for more options

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // See Evidence documentation for more options
```

which documentation?

});
```

For a complete list of configuration options, you can refer to:
- [Query Configuration Source](https://github.com/evidence-dev/evidence/blob/main/packages/lib/sdk/src/usql/query/Query.js#L728)
- [Query Types Definition](https://github.com/evidence-dev/evidence/blob/main/packages/lib/sdk/src/usql/types.ts#L35-L58)

### Next Steps

Now that you understand both static and dynamic queries, you might want to explore:
- Implementing error handling for dynamic queries
- Creating components that combine multiple dynamic queries
- Building interactive data exploration interfaces
- Optimizing query performance

> Remember that dynamic queries are more powerful but also more complex. Start with simple implementations and gradually add more features as you become comfortable with the system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dynamic queries are more powerful but also more complex. Start with simple implementations and gradually add more features as you become comfortable with the system.
```

## Error Handling

> When working with queries in your components, it's essential to handle errors gracefully to provide a good user experience. The `QueryLoad` component provides built-in error handling capabilities through its error slot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When working with queries in your components, handle errors gracefully to provide a good user experience. The `QueryLoad` component provides built-in error handling capabilities through its error slot:
```

> Here's how you can implement basic error handling:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

You can make your error handling more sophisticated by providing context-specific messages:

```html
<QueryLoad data={query} let:loaded={queryResults}>
    <svelte:fragment slot="error" let:error>
        <div class="text-red-600">
            {#if error.message.includes('timeout')}
                The query is taking longer than expected. Please try again.
            {:else if error.message.includes('permission')}
                You don't have permission to access this data.
            {:else}
                An unexpected error occurred while loading the data.
                Error details: {error.message}
            {/if}
        </div>
    </svelte:fragment>

    <ul>
        {#each queryResults as item}
            <li>{item.name}</li>
        {/each}
    </ul>
</QueryLoad>
```

<Alert status="info">

**Error Handling Best Practices**

- Always provide user-friendly error messages that explain what went wrong
- Include technical details only when they would be helpful to the user
- Consider providing action items or next steps when appropriate
- Use consistent error styling across your application

</Alert>

> When working with dynamic queries, you might want to handle errors differently depending on the state of your component:

Reviewer: Everything below this section feels pretty in the weeds
